README.md, before:

## COP 4520 - Assignment #3
A minotaur has half a million birthday presents and a mars rover has a few thermometers.

Note that this repo is based on the assignment outlined in the `assignment.pdf` file.
All below explanations require understanding of the assignment first.

To run any of the two problems, clone this repo to a desired location and make sure to have rust and cargo installed, if not, install them using [rustup](https://rustup.rs).

## Problem 1: The Birthday Presents Party
This is referring to code in `src/bin/presents.rs`.

### Design Breakdown

### Evaluation

### Running
Type in the following command to run the code for problem 1:
```
cargo run --bin presents
```

## Problem 2: Atmospheric Temperature Reading Module
This is referring to code in `src/bin/temperature.rs`.

### Design Breakdown
Solving this problem is quite simple if we consider it as a Multi-Producer, Single-Consumer (MPSC) problem.

Where we have multiple producers in the form of the temperature sensors on the rover and a single-consumer represented by the shared-resource that we can consider the CPU on the rover itself.

Rust makes it extremely easy to create these kinds of objects since it has a type called `mpsc` which is used to create a "channel" at the start of the main function. 
This "channel" comes in the form of two main parts: a transmitter and a receiver. 

The idea is that we can represent each sensor as a thread and each thread is given a copy of the transmitter before being spawned in.
Each transmitter copy has a `send` function to send in the temperature readings to the queue that formed by the Rust MPSC type. 

Each reading is sent in at a certain interval about 60 times to represent the 60 minutes in an hour before a report is complete.

Note that the receiver part of the channel is being used only on the main thread and it represents the single-consumer.
As the data is sent with the transmitter, the receiver takes in the sent temperature readings and collect them all into an array.
The array is then sorted from smallest to largest and the top 5 highest and lowest temperatures are printed to the console.

Later on, a function is used to iterate through all 10-minute intervals of the collected readings to calculate the largest temperature difference across those intervals.
These are also printed to the console.

Below is an example output:
```
-- Hourly Report --
Note: Temperature rankings are from lowest to highest temperature in degrees F.

Lowest 5 Temperatures: [-99.97339, -99.12756, -99.0766, -99.07054, -99.02156]
Highest 5 Temperatures: [68.74765, 69.111435, 69.27263, 69.80205, 69.950516]

10-Minute interval from 25-35 had the largest temperature difference of 40.20719 degrees F.
```
### Evaluation
In terms of evaluation of this code, since the concurrency primtiive is a simply queue in the form of a MPSC problem, the solution is lock-free and effectively wait-free. As the progress is made on each thread, the results are simply sent to a receiver and processed after all threads complete the "hour" of gathering temperature data. There is no way for any deadlocks or data races to occur, all threads are guaranteed to progress as no threads wait for any other thread. 

For runtime, this is not very relevant to the problem as it entirely depends on how long the threads are slept for between each reading. 
For my code I've set it to wait 1ms between readings to represent one minute.


### Running
Type in the following command to run the code for problem 2:
```
cargo run --bin temperature
```

Commit message:

Linked lists and rust mix about as well as oil and water

README.md, after:

## COP 4520 - Assignment #3
A minotaur has half a million birthday presents and a mars rover has a few thermometers.

Note that this repo is based on the assignment outlined in the `assignment.pdf` file.
All below explanations require understanding of the assignment first.

To run any of the two problems, clone this repo to a desired location and make sure to have rust and cargo installed, if not, install them using [rustup](https://rustup.rs).

## Problem 1: The Birthday Presents Party
This is referring to code in `src/bin/presents.rs`.

### Design Breakdown
Implementing a linked list in Rust, let alone a concurrent one is notoriously difficult and as a relatively new user of Rust, this has been a nightmare. As a result, I've decided to move away from the linked list itself and just stick to Rust's vectors and pass those around concurrently. The explanation for this is described in a wonderful story paragraph below:

The servants, in there best efforts to solve this problem decided to talk to the Minotaur about problems with their implementation, as a result, the servants the minotaur came to a compromise: don't use a linked list! As a result, the presents where simply placed in order on the ground instead of linked in a chain. This way, the minotaur could also save money by not needing to purchase several hundreds of thousands of chains. After deciding not to use a linked list, the minotaur realized how archaic and problematic the usage of chains might be (especially for a memory safe language!!!!).





### Evaluation

### Running
Type in the following command to run the code for problem 1:
```
cargo run --bin presents
```

## Problem 2: Atmospheric Temperature Reading Module
This is referring to code in `src/bin/temperature.rs`.

### Design Breakdown
Solving this problem is quite simple if we consider it as a Multi-Producer, Single-Consumer (MPSC) problem.

Where we have multiple producers in the form of the temperature sensors on the rover and a single-consumer represented by the shared-resource that we can consider the CPU on the rover itself.

Rust makes it extremely easy to create these kinds of objects since it has a type called `mpsc` which is used to create a "channel" at the start of the main function. 
This "channel" comes in the form of two main parts: a transmitter and a receiver. 

The idea is that we can represent each sensor as a thread and each thread is given a copy of the transmitter before being spawned in.
Each transmitter copy has a `send` function to send in the temperature readings to the queue that formed by the Rust MPSC type. 

Each reading is sent in at a certain interval about 60 times to represent the 60 minutes in an hour before a report is complete.

Note that the receiver part of the channel is being used only on the main thread and it represents the single-consumer.
As the data is sent with the transmitter, the receiver takes in the sent temperature readings and collect them all into an array.
The array is then sorted from smallest to largest and the top 5 highest and lowest temperatures are printed to the console.

Later on, a function is used to iterate through all 10-minute intervals of the collected readings to calculate the largest temperature difference across those intervals.
These are also printed to the console.

Below is an example output:
```
-- Hourly Report --
Note: Temperature rankings are from lowest to highest temperature in degrees F.

Lowest 5 Temperatures: [-99.97339, -99.12756, -99.0766, -99.07054, -99.02156]
Highest 5 Temperatures: [68.74765, 69.111435, 69.27263, 69.80205, 69.950516]

10-Minute interval from 25-35 had the largest temperature difference of 40.20719 degrees F.
```
### Evaluation
In terms of evaluation of this code, since the concurrency primtiive is a simply queue in the form of a MPSC problem, the solution is lock-free and effectively wait-free. As the progress is made on each thread, the results are simply sent to a receiver and processed after all threads complete the "hour" of gathering temperature data. There is no way for any deadlocks or data races to occur, all threads are guaranteed to progress as no threads wait for any other thread. 

For runtime, this is not very relevant to the problem as it entirely depends on how long the threads are slept for between each reading. 
For my code I've set it to wait 1ms between readings to represent one minute.


### Running
Type in the following command to run the code for problem 2:
```
cargo run --bin temperature
```
